This video is about Coronavirus and
money. Now this is a really important
video, I've been wanting to make it for a long time, because huge, huge, historic things
are happening in the world of money here. Even when I was working as a money trader in
the 2008 crisis nothing ever happened of
this speed.  Now what's happening in the world
of money here is going to dominate the
economy for the next few years
quite possibly even the next few decades.
It's going to affect you it's going to affect
your family's financial position, so if
you want to understand what's going to
happen in the economy going forward, you've got to watch this video.
Now so far in this crisis, most workers have had their incomes relatively protected. in this country the
In this country, the UK, most workers are still working and getting their regular incomes,
of those who can't work the majority are
being supported by government furlough
and self-employment schemes.
Now, as many as five and a half million
workers are falling through the gaps of
those schemes and are getting almost no
income support.  Now those guys already
are feeling the pain of this financial crisis,
but what we're going to explain in
this video is how even if your income is
being supported, the changes in the
world of money, behind the scenes, are
going to affect your financial position
going forward.  Now we're going to explain how.
Now the biggest changes have been happening in the world of government and central banks,
now this is happening all over the
world, but in the UK the central bank, the
Bank of England, has committed to
printing 300 billion pounds,
300 billion pounds, it's an enormous amount of money,
it's £4,500 for
every single man, woman and child in the
country.  It's more than three times the
net worth of Jeff Bezos, the world's
richest man.  Now when such a huge amount
of money gets printed and put into the
economy, it's really important you
understand three things about it:
1. How does it work? So we are going to talk about exactly what money printing is.
2. Where does the money go?
3. Where does the money end up.
Now those last two things they may sound similar
but they're actually crucially different, and we're going to explain why.
Okay so number one, how does this new money work.  So I think a lot of people are confused by the
concept of money printing.  It's important
to understand that this 300 billion
pound is brand-new money created by the
central bank.  Now if that's confusing to you,
you just need to understand that the
central bank has the legal right to
print or create brand-new money.  Now we
say "print money" to give the visual idea
of a printing press printing out new
banknotes, but in reality nowadays
most money is electronic, so what
that means in practice is that the Bank
of England is allowed to simply credit
its own account with new money.
Okay, so this is brand new money, it doesn't come from anyone, it's not raised through taxes
it's simply created by the Bank of
England.  When that money gets poured into
the system we need to understand who's
gonna get it, and the next question: where
does it go?  Now most of this money is
getting lent from the Bank of England
to the government.  Now even though this
is brand-newly created money, and the
Bank of England is a government
institution, the government still has to
borrow it from the Bank of England.  This
creates a debt which legally the
government has to pay back.  For this
reason government debt has increased
hugely already in this crisis and just
recently UK government debt has gone
above 100% of GDP for the first time in
over 50 years.  So what does the
government then do with this money.  Well
the government gives most of it to
furloughed workers and other workers who
can't get their income during the Coronavirus crisis
This brings us to part three:
where does the money end up?
now we know the money is being paid to furloughed workers.  But if we look at
the actual situation of furloughed
workers, they're actually receiving less
income than they were before the crisis
happened.  This is because, even though
they're receiving government income
support
it's only 80 percent of their original
wages and their original wages are no
longer coming in.  So this creates a
mystery.  We know that a lot of new money
is coming into the economy, and we know
that ultimately it's going to the furloughed
workers, but the furloughed workers
are no richer than they were before.  So
where's the money going?
that brings us to question number three
Where does the money end up?  Now we know the money is being paid to the furloughed
workers.  But the furloughed workers
have less money than they had before the
Coronavirus crisis, because they've
lost the wages that they were originally
being paid.  If we want to know who ends
up with the money we need to find out
who has those wages?  Where have the wages gone that used to be paid to the workers?
So if you want to understand we have to
follow this cash flow back through the system
Now, normally wages get paid to the
workers through the companies.  But if we look
at the companies, we will find that most of
these companies are struggling as well
because customers have simply stopped
coming to their stores and stopped
buying this stuff.  So we need to follow
the cash flow back
one step further, to the customers.  Now
the customers in this crisis have
dropped their spending massively.  For
that reason, many of these customers are
holding more money in their pockets.  That
money is not going to the companies
which means the wages have stopped.  So
the people who are holding more money,
the net benefitors of the new money being
put into the system are actually the
customers.  Now when I say that, you're
probably thinking "wait a minute I'm a
customer where's my £4,500 per man
woman and child?" and that would be a good question.
The reason why you might not be
holding £4,500 more than you were
before is because not all customers are
created equal.  Remember the reason that
customers have more money now than they had before the crisis is because they've
cut their spending.  But it's not all
spending that has cut here.  Spending on
essentials such as rent, mortgage, food
and bills still has to be paid.  So if
most of your spending is on those
essentials, you're spending won't have
fallen by much.  The spending that has
fallen is on non essentials and luxuries.
So see here, the customers who are saving
the most money are the ones who have
very high spending on non essentials and
luxuries.  Well, you're probably starting
to see where I'm going with this.  Who
spends a lot of money on luxuries?
The customers who are accumulating money
during this crisis are the rich.
Now I wrote an article predicting this back in March, explaining how rich people, because
they would cut their spending would
accumulate savings and money during this
crisis.  Since then, data has come out from
a lot of institutions, including the IPPR
in the UK, demonstrating clearly that
rich people have been accumulating money
during this crisis, because their
spending has reduced so much.  It's
interesting to compare here the
situation of a furloughed worker with a
richer person in the economy.  Furloughed
workers have lost their income, which
comes from services jobs, but they've
kept most of their spending, which is
largely on essentials like rent and
bills.  Richer workers, who tend to work in
office jobs and can work from home, have
kept their incomes, whereas their
spending, which is largely on luxuries, has
collapsed.  It's important to understand
the significance it has on the economy
when the rich people stop spending.
Now in normal times, rich people have
very
high spending, much higher than ordinary
workers.  Because that spending goes to
companies, which employ workers, it
contributes to wages being paid.  This is
really important because ordinary
workers have to pay bills, rent, food.  When
they pay that money, a lot of that money
ends up going to the owners of the
houses and owners of the corporations
who are themselves the rich.  So as you
can see in this diagram, in a normal
situation, the spending of the rich goes
to the workers, and when the workers pay
the rent, bills and food, it goes back to
the rich.  The money flows around in a
circle.  So what happens when the rich
suddenly stop spending?  Well that money
was driving the wages for ordinary
workers.  Suddenly, the workers' wages have disappeared.  But they still have to pay
the rent, they still have to pay the
mortgage, they still have to pay the
bills.  How are they gonna do that with no
income?  It's a massive problem and if
nothing happens some of these guys they
could become homeless
they could even not even get food on the
table.  So it's no surprise that in this
emergency situation the government and
the Bank of England stepped in with the
furlough scheme.  This provides a substitute income to ordinary workers who have lost
their wages.  It's important to realise
that at this point, from the perspective
of the worker things actually look quite
similar to how they did pre-crisis.  They've got an
income, they've got their expenditure.  The
income's a little bit less, they have to
save a little bit, but from their
perspective the situation is largely
unchanged.  But look at what is happening
outside in the system.  Previously the
money was going out in a circle.  What's
happening now?  The money gets printed by
the Bank of England, it goes to the
worker, the worker pays their bills,
it goes to the rich, and then... it just
stays there!  Because the rich are not
spending their money anymore.  That means money piles up with the rich and
accumulates, and what happens with the
government?  They accumulate debt.  Okay so
we've learned that during the Covid
crisis, most people's financial situation
appears relatively unchanged.  However,
behind the scenes the government is
accumulating big piles of debt, and the
rich are accumulating big piles of money.
The next question is... why does that
matter?  Well the easier part of that
question is to talk about why big
government debt could affect you.
Those of you who are old enough to
remember 2008 will remember at that time
too, government debt increased, and the
government came in and used that to
enforce austerity.  Now that impacted a
lot of people, it had a lot of effects
in many, many different ways.  That could
happen again if government debt increases
again.  Now I'm not a politician,
I'm not political forecaster I'm an
economic forecaster.  I can't tell you if
austerity will happen again.  But what I
want to talk about is those big piles of
money stacking up in rich people's bank
accounts.  How's that gonna affect you?  So what does it mean if the rich get richer?
I mean if they just stack the money in
their bank account it's probably not a
problem right?  Personally, I worked in the
finance industry for a long time, I
managed money for the rich, I've got
involved in understanding how they
invest their money.  Through that I made
some money myself
I got involved in investing myself.  I
know a little bit about what the rich do
when money starts piling up in their
bank account.  Number one, they buy houses
but it's not just houses they buy, they
buy stocks, they buy shares, they buy
bonds, they buy gold.  To be honest, they
buy everything.  Now let's look at what
happened last time the government used
money printing to solve a financial
crisis.  We can look back to the 2008
crisis.  In many ways, that was similar.
That time, too, the Bank of England printed a huge amount of money to try and deal with an
economic crisis.  What happened then?
Well within six years stock prices in London
had doubled.  Within three years the gold
price was up 150%, and within 10 years of
the crisis, London house prices had
doubled.  What does that mean?  Well in the
20 years since 2000, through that period
of crisis and rising house prices, the
percentage of young people who've been
able to afford a home in this country
has fallen from 65% to 27%.  What will it
mean if house prices double again?  It'll
mean that, realistically, people who are
from a family that doesn't have a home
now, will probably never own housing.  It means that those people will be locked out of
the housing market forever.  It means that
young people will find it more difficult to
get the security of a home to raise a family.
And at the same
time as that's happening, stock prices
are gonna go up, gold price is gonna go
up, the rich are gonna get richer than
ever before.  But it's not just stocks and
shares and housing that these guys are
going to buy.  They'll be in the shops too
and they'll have a lot more money to push
those prices up.  It's very likely that
over the next few years we're going to
see the prices of a lot of things
increase.  At the same time, what's going
to happen to wages?  Well we've already
seen the unemployment rate double in this
country, and that's in spite of a
furlough scheme encouraging firms to
keep jobs on.  There's currently nine
million workers on that furlough scheme,
and when that starts to be wrapped up a lot
of those workers will probably be pushed
into unemployment.  With unemployment
going up and up and up,
it's very likely that just as house prices and prices in
the shops are rising, wages will stay low.
Okay so what can we do?  We know that
under the current situation the rich are
going to get richer, while wages full
house prices rise and shop prices
increase.  It's going to make housing
unaffordable and it's going to drop the
living conditions for regular people.
Can it be fixed?  Well, personally I think that
it can.  If you go back and look at this
slide explaining the problem, we can see
what's happening.  Money, currently, is
flowing from the government to the rich,
leaving the government with big piles of
debt and the rich with big piles of
money.  We can actually fix this with one
simple arrow in this diagram.  If we start
money moving, back round the system, away
from the rich, no more cash piles for the
rich, no more debt for the government.
In my opinion we need to find a ways the
tax of truly rich in our society, by
taxing wealth rather than just income.
This will draw money from the wealthiest
people in our society, the people who get
their income from owning assets, rather
than working.  Ultimately we need to find
a way to make the richest in our society
contribute to fixing this crisis rather
than simply profiting from it.  Otherwise
financial security is going to move out
of the reach of our kids.  Thank you for
watching.  This is a message which is really important to me.  If you think it's
important too, share it with your friends
share t with your family. If you want to
know more about me you can see my
Twitter and my website in the description
come back here for more videos.  Okay,
thanks again.